+++
title = 'Life After College and Working as a Software Engineer - My 1 Year Reflection'
date = 2024-09-07T00:21:47+01:00
+++

As a college student, there's a recurring thought that often pops into our minds: what happens after graduation? While we already know the basic answer - get a job, earn money, make a living - many of us are more curious about what life becomes after we finish studying. Up until now, most of us have only known school, hanging out with friends, and worrying about exams as our biggest concerns.

I didn't know how to fill out an IRS form, nor did I realize how gruesome the housing market actually was. I wasn’t concerned about which ETF to invest in. Factor in another hundred or so "grown-up" responsibilities that used to seem distant, and the question of what happens after graduation becomes much deeper than it first appears.

Despite this, we all go through it. As *cliché* as it might sound, growing up is a part of life. I'm closing in on a year since I started working as a software engineer, and I thought it would be interesting to reflect on my journey so far. A lot has happened in just one year. This piece will almost serve as a letter to my future self - an opportunity to compare my past views with my current ones, and to track not only my professional but also my personal growth.

## Transitioning to the real world

Finishing college studies, at least in Portugal, can be a bit of an anti-climactic moment. Most of the festivities take place a couple of months before you actually graduate (usually in May during the [Burning of the Stripes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queima_das_Fitas#Porto)), so defending my Master's thesis was pretty much what was left on my college journey. On a random Friday morning, I presented [my thesis](https://repositorio-aberto.up.pt/bitstream/10216/152101/2/636848.pdf) and successfully graduated. I got a pat on the back from my supervisor and off I went into the cruel job market. Though this is obviously an exaggeration, it has some truth to it, in the sense that it accurately represents how confusing or even surreal this moment feels - going through 12 years of basic/secondary school plus 5 years for a bachelor's and master's degree, and having it all end like this just felt strange. Regardless, I took a picture in front of my university with my printed thesis for the record and headed back home, officially a Master in Computer Engineering.

What followed was an intense search for a job in software engineering. Getting a good entry-level job in software engineering in Portugal is, to say the least, frustrating. I had no particular interest in working in a specific field and applied to most entry-level jobs I could find that seemed interesting and aligned with what I enjoy working on. I went through multiple interviews and several different recruitment processes. There’s a lot that can be said about the junior job market in Portugal, but I will spare the details in this post, as I don’t want to deviate too much from the main topic. It took two months before I found a job that fit my interests, and I officially started working as a software engineer.

## Growing Pains: The Junior Software Engineer Experience

The first day of work was, curiously enough, similar to the first day of kindergarten. Just like a kid, you feel anxious stepping into a new world and getting out of your comfort zone. Even though everyone reassures you that you'll do fine, you can't help feeling butterflies in your stomach or getting cold feet. And like any junior developer, you feel lost. Even though everyone encourages you to ask for help and is always available to do so, there's a bit of pain in knowing you're bothering that one mid/senior software engineer for the 13th time in a single day. This is not to be confused with depending on others to do your work. Most questions can be solved by a simple Google search. I'm talking about learning the ropes of the job - understanding processes and how to navigate your work environment. Similar to a kid wanting to make their parents proud, a junior developer wants to do a lot and do it well. This isn't necessarily bad - the word *talent* often gets thrown around a lot when labeling recent graduates, but it isn’t worth much if the supposed talent doesn’t perform. As a result, you worry about multiple things: you worry about voicing your opinions because you might say something borderline wrong, you worry that the supposed bug fix you did wasn’t actually effective, or that the improvement suggestion you proposed wasn’t that good.

These can be defined as the growing pains of a junior software engineer. You can’t avoid them; you can only find a way to adapt and overcome them. The metaphor of the junior and the kid becomes more like the junior and the baby. Just as you nurture a baby and watch it develop into a kid, teen, and adult, juniors must be supported in order to fulfill their potential. This was evident once I compared my experience with others in similar situations. Feeling supported and encouraged by my work colleagues and manager was vital for me to feel well-integrated into the job. Step by step, I started being more active in discussions with other engineers, more productive in my work, and absorbing knowledge from my colleagues like a sponge.

One of the things I learned was that my coding standards were, to say the least, very rudimentary. It’s interesting to look back at the code I wrote a year ago or even during college and think, "What was I thinking when I wrote this? This is terrible." And, funnily enough, I’m pretty sure I’ll have the same reaction in a few years when I look at the code I write today. I think having this mentality is where I grew the most - there’s always room for improvement. Matthew McConaughey explained it best at his Oscar acceptance speech:

> *My hero is always ten years away. I’m never going to be my hero. I’m not going to obtain that, and that’s fine with me because it keeps me with somebody to keep on chasing.*

I like to think of this hero as my final software engineer form, the ultimate programmer who respects every single design pattern and rejects code smells in their code. I know I’ll never reach that level (nor will most of us), but that’s fine - it gives me a purpose to keep learning new things. As I transition from being a junior to a mid-level engineer and beyond, I will always want to retain that raw, genuine feeling a junior has of wanting to learn more and more, never satisfied with their current knowledge.

I also grew a lot in my soft skills. Obviously, there’s some stuff you can’t teach (at least easily), like staying calm when speaking to an audience or explaining things to someone without messing up your entire speech, but you learn to handle day-to-day work situations, which can sometimes be undesirable, in the best way possible. You learn how to effectively communicate with your colleagues and how to organize your work. That validation you need to ensure what you’re doing is correct slowly fades, and you find yourself becoming more and more independent. This doesn’t mean you’re free from failure - you’ll inadvertently fail and learn from those mistakes. The key is feeling confident enough in your decisions so that when you fail, you’ll be prepared to deal with that failure and grow. And as you grow, you'll also be faced with multiple questions:

- "Is this job for me?"
- "Do I enjoy doing this?"
- "Do I see myself working on this for the next 10, 20, 30 years?"

Software engineering is a broad industry, and the most important thing a junior should do, at least from my perspective, is find the field that excites them the most and makes them want to get out of bed every day and work on it. Once again, though it is a cliché, Mark Twain describes it best:

> *Find a job you love, and you will never have to work a day in your life.*

But don’t be fooled into thinking that you won’t have bad days. Just like us humans, no job is perfect, and you’ll have to deal with inevitable situations that'll make just shut down your laptop and go do something else. However, if you find something you’re truly passionate about, it gives you a different perspective on how you face these issues and how you approach each workday.

It would be delusional of me not to mention how fortunate I am to be in the position I am today. I work from home doing something I enjoy, which fits all my work requirements. I avoid the hassles of commuting daily and manage to balance my personal and work life well. On top of that, I work with modern technologies in a great company environment. Unfortunately, this isn’t the case for every fresh-out-of-college individual. Even comparing my situation to my parents' experiences at this stage - though it was 30 years ago - I realize I’m in a much better position than they were, which makes me appreciate the opportunities I’ve had. While I worked hard to get here, it would be unfair to say I wasn’t given the opportunities - I believe it was my responsibility to make the most out of them.

## Finding a purpose for my Career

I believe that, more than anything, I found a purpose for my career. I’ve been working in the video game industry for the past year, and I intend on sticking around for the years to come. For me, the game industry speaks directly to my childhood. A defining part of it and the development of my personality is greatly attributed to my experience with video games. Whether it was on my old PS2 playing FIFA 07, spending a Master Ball on Giratina because I was too afraid it would escape (true story), or on late-night sessions with my friends playing a gazillion different games, some of the finest memories I have are playing video games, which often are the ones I treasure the most. I learned that games are much more than entertainment - they are a way of connecting people and sometimes greatly impact the lives of those who play them.

Some might read this post and think I’m being naive or foolish for making such statements with so little work experience. That might be true, and it’s not unusual for me to disagree with my own past opinions. But that’s exactly why I wanted to write this down - if my views change and what I’ve mentioned becomes a distant reality, I’ll want to understand why. However, I also believe we shouldn't suffer in anticipation and should instead appreciate what we have now. And my present is that I enjoy being a game developer.

More than just enjoying the work I now do, I’ve found a vision for my future work: I don’t just want to make games; I want to craft experiences that impact players in the same way the games from my childhood impacted me.